Michael Shannon: Hello there and welcome everybody to the CIS SP boot camp.
Michael Shannon: It may be early morning, or maybe afternoon, maybe almost Tuesday, for you it's Monday, where I am i'm in Houston Texas.
Michael Shannon: And my name is Michael Shannon and i'm not the only person here this week with you joining us in the background is Dave robichaux dave's gonna be helping out in the chat area in the Q amp a area so it's Mike and Dave this week and, as I said, i'm in Houston Texas David is in.
Michael Shannon: Frederick 10 new brunswick Canada so dave's up in Canada i'm down here in Texas, and wherever you wherever you are welcome it's great to have you here in our five day ci ssp boot camp.
Michael Shannon: So before we dive into look at a little bit of the exam real quick and then we're going to get into our content.
Michael Shannon: If you'll notice.
Michael Shannon: I on my splash screen here, I have two numbers for CIS SP so little uh I don't know kind of a cautionary tale right, so I got my CIS SP the first time in 2002.
Michael Shannon: So 20 years ago pretty much, and it was January of 2002 at that point in time, I had five years of experience in security and it primarily due to hipaa.
Michael Shannon: hipaa security and privacy That was what really gave you my experience doing training and consulting in the phoenix.
Michael Shannon: Arizona area scottsdale Arizona area, so I got my CSP the first time 2002 and it was a you know giant envelope Convention Center with the number two pencils and filling in the circles and all that I think it was like six hours.
Michael Shannon: Well, things happened and I went through kind of a career change and kind of got away from security altogether and I let my CIS SP sort of vacation laps.
Michael Shannon: And then, so I took it again and I think 2015 so that's my lesson to you once you go through this boot camp.
Michael Shannon: And you pass the CIS SP make sure you stay up with your continuing credits over that three year period and pay your dues and don't let that sort of vacation lapse like I did okay so that's my first.
Michael Shannon: bit of advice to you, so you will need to be aware of the is C squared code Okay, they have a code of ethics.
Michael Shannon: They also have some other things to be aware of, you probably get one or two questions on Okay, so the first code of ethics.
Michael Shannon: Basically, says, you know you're recognizing the getting this certification is a privilege and like I said, you have to first earn it.
Michael Shannon: And then you need to maintain it right, and then you, you know you're admitting to you're going to support the code right so.
Michael Shannon: If you intentionally or knowledge knowingly violate in the provision, you may be subject to a peer review and they may revoke your certification so you're also obligated to adhere to the different canons okay.
Michael Shannon: So here's the preamble, the safety and welfare of society and the common good duty to our principles and to each other.
Michael Shannon: requires that we had here in the scene do it here to the highest ethical standards of behavior therefore it's strict adherence to the code here's the four cannons this is most likely what you'll see on the exam okay.
Michael Shannon: One protect society, the common good necessary public trust and confidence, and of course the infrastructure number to act honorably honestly justly responsibly and legally.
Michael Shannon: Three provide diligent and competent service to principles and for advance and protect the profession, those are the cannons the exam.
Michael Shannon: We use a computerized adaptive test for all English exams Okay, so if you're taking it in English three hours.
Michael Shannon: And you're going to get mostly multiple choice questions, but you will get what they call advanced innovative like drag and drop type of things or you'll get a topology in the last you to you know fill some things in most of the questions.
Michael Shannon: are multiple choice, the passing grade 700 out of 1000 right, and then you have the option of going to attend it depends on where you are going to a testing Center.
Michael Shannon: or possibly getting a proctor and taking the exam from home okay that's the cat exam the linear exam is in other languages, and this is actually more.
Michael Shannon: along the lines of what i've took in 2002 and two and 2015 it was the CA T type Okay, so if you're taking in some other language, besides English.
Michael Shannon: Then you're gonna have six hours for the exam.
Michael Shannon: here's the weightings of the newest CIS SP iteration they really didn't change this hardly at all in 2021.
Michael Shannon: But they did add 1% to domain eight so software development, security used to be 9% and they bump that up to 10% okay so.
Michael Shannon: And really the CIS SP exam we're going to talk more about this, but they're really testing you from the standpoint of a security manager.
Michael Shannon: Okay, so you will have to wear that security management hat.
Michael Shannon: As you're taking this exam which means kind of letting if you're a really experienced network security person or software security person or a database security.
Michael Shannon: You kind of have to you know kind of let go a little bit of any bias, you might have and focus on this from a management standpoint, and so what i'll often do is I don't recommend a lot of other books.
Michael Shannon: You know you got five PDF files that you're going to be able to download along with this course, that you can watch over and over.
Michael Shannon: I would say the pdfs that you download should be your primary study guide, but people often ask you know what's a good other book to get and you know anything you can do.
Michael Shannon: That would give you a database of questions, not a not a dump but maybe books to have you know questions in them.
Michael Shannon: Because that's part of the The challenge is in these exams, especially the linear exam that's non English six hours is a long time to not.
Michael Shannon: Look at your phone you know or check your stock quotes or your cyber currency prices three hours that's still a long time, so you know you need to train your mind and your body.
Michael Shannon: For that experience of two and a half to three hours, and I would say it's very likely you're going to go at least two and a half hours.
Michael Shannon: of just focusing on one thing, without any distractions and a lot of us that may be a new experience.
Michael Shannon: Two and a half to three hours without your phone or your pad or any other type of stimulus.
Michael Shannon: So I would say, one of the things you want to make sure that you do is before you take the exam kind of sit down with a one of those you know books, with a bunch of questions in them and just go through the process of sitting down for two and a half hours and answering questions right.
Michael Shannon: And then there's also the is a CA.
Michael Shannon: Has a certified information security manager.
Michael Shannon: certification.
Michael Shannon: So it might not be a bad idea to get the you know.
Michael Shannon: The best guide, you can find for the CIA sm because that's a security manager.
Michael Shannon: You know type of exam and it and a lot of the content is sourced from the same areas missed.
Michael Shannon: Right ISO IEC type documentation so that's another good you know find the best CSM book, you can find that might be a good companion.
Michael Shannon: But if you want to know about other books that are out there, you know Dave is is there on standby to help you.
Michael Shannon: There is a another book out there that's think like like it's a CIS is a ci ssp prep book but it's like think like a manager I don't know the exact title of it, maybe some of you out there already have that book.
Michael Shannon: But that might be a good one to get as well right so that's that's our that's the hat we're going to wear.
Michael Shannon: and your best approach to this boot camp, because I think we're together, you know we take to it, we eight to 15 minute breaks so that's going to take out 30 minutes so that's you know that's 30 minutes, a day of breaks.
Michael Shannon: So you would only have 18 something hours together right so.
Michael Shannon: Your best approach yeah the 11th hour books not bad, I have that would Victor the 11th hour book but it's truly an 11th hour mean you know I think the best 11th hour book would be the PDF guide but it's not a bad book I have that in a kindle version.
Michael Shannon: So.
Michael Shannon: These weightings they they always change, but they don't change by much but uh.
Michael Shannon: Hopefully you're not going to wait till 22 the next iteration of this right, hopefully you're going to take they change it every three years right so.
Michael Shannon: Hopefully you're going to take this iteration so you should be focusing on, I mean the weightings are important because you technically have to pass enough questions in each domain and, by the way, once you do, that the exam is over.
Michael Shannon: Once you satisfy all the domains in the question database you passed and your exams over okay.
Michael Shannon: So you know the your best approach really over the next five days is to do a gap analysis right, I mean that the time that you spend with Dave and I, this is not really my the CIS SP boot camp is not really a teacher student relationship at all.
Michael Shannon: You know, you should be at least four years into full time security experience paid.
Michael Shannon: So this is basically Dave and I, who have this sort of occasion helping out our peers get a certification that they want that we have that's really the approach here.
Michael Shannon: Is that a whole lot of me I mean most of my teaching is just reminding you, and maybe going a little bit deeper some real world examples, but.
Michael Shannon: Do a gap analysis find the areas of your weakness or you're where you're not as strong will say it that way and realize those of the areas you would have focused on so that you get those questions in that domain.
Michael Shannon: But you only have to get a 70 out of you know 100.
Michael Shannon: that's so doing a gap analysis really is your is your best approach right finding those areas that you need to get stronger in.
Michael Shannon: Now, there will be some to some there it is Julio Thank you how to think like a manager for the CIS SP exam that's it by Luke document yeah that's a that's one that a lot of our students, I have recommended.
Michael Shannon: Okay, so obviously.
Michael Shannon: The fundamentals there's gonna be some you know filling in those gaps we all, we know that the triad right the security triad which really represents our goals.
Michael Shannon: When we go to choose our controls right administrative or managerial controls technical controls physical controls.
Michael Shannon: Maybe you'll see them called operational by nist but those controls that we choose, they address these main three goals.
Michael Shannon: Confidentiality right protecting you know passwords cryptographic keys personally identifiable information health information intellectual property.
Michael Shannon: If you have a class if you have a model, like a mandatory access control model where you have classification or sensitivity levels you're protecting you know sensitive information.
Michael Shannon: Okay sensitive but unclassified secret top secret right that's confidentiality and often we're going to use a cryptographic technique.
Michael Shannon: not always Okay, we have ways to create enclaves and compartmentalize for confidentiality, because if we think about high level confidentiality, you know there's a big movement now towards, how do we get confidentiality for data in use.
Michael Shannon: You know, we should be very familiar with protecting data in transit right secure Shell other types of encapsulation pls IP SEC I conversion to.
Michael Shannon: You know data in transit, and then data at rest usually some mode of as, especially in the United States but data in US that's kind of high level confidentiality.
Michael Shannon: Today, maybe using homomorphic encryption.
Michael Shannon: Which is an algebraic technique.
Michael Shannon: Or maybe secure enclave like in your iPhone cloud providers, for example, Amazon web services they have something called aws night row enclaves okay there's no, you know encryption it's just these special secure very difficult to access instances or images.
Michael Shannon: So secure compartmentalization or secure enclaves high level confidentiality from a management standpoint right integrity.
Michael Shannon: Fundamentally measures, the attackers ability to manipulate change data address or data in transit, maintaining the integrity and often traditionally to maintain integrity, we would implement a hashed message authentication code right and H MAC.
Michael Shannon: sha one shot to shot 384 right and ah MAC which gives us the integrity mechanism in the cryptographic hash but also the MAC or the secret password or key however it's derived.
Michael Shannon: That gives us the origin authentication so when we see the CIA triad a does not stand for authentication a stands for of availability.
Michael Shannon: Which is one of those areas of security that's a challenge for us as security managers, because we have to maintain we'll talk about that here in a second the a.
Michael Shannon: availability, which may not necessarily be something that we have the kind of control over.
Michael Shannon: As security practitioners and engineers and architects having control over confidentiality mechanisms integrity mechanisms in origin authentication absolutely but high availability sometimes that's the server operators or the server admins or database or network people.
Michael Shannon: and integrity is more than just make making sure that data at rest and data in transit aren't modified or changed and unauthorized way.
Michael Shannon: But as we're going to find out when we get into mandatory access control models, there are higher levels of integrity, for example, as they work with our zero trust initiative.
Michael Shannon: You may have from an administrative standpoint, you may have the ability to modify something, but that doesn't give you the authority.
Michael Shannon: to modify something so we implement higher levels of integrity, like a Clark Wilson model.
Michael Shannon: To make sure that only if you have separation of duties only part of your job duty responsibility, are you allowed to change something even though you may have the highest level of permissions or you may be at a certain sensitivity level.
Michael Shannon: You may operate at the top secret level but, according to the model, you may not be able to modify.
Michael Shannon: So high level and here's an example of high level integrity, the Clark Wilson model, yes, the first bullet point that's important okay obviously that's kind of like what you know integrity is.
Michael Shannon: But higher advanced integrity is ensuring your separation of duties, and this may be, this may be mostly automated.
Michael Shannon: Okay, preventing authorized users from making improper modifications well formed transactions, maintaining consistency.
Michael Shannon: That goes beyond just the first bullet point will be commonly think of integrity write a check some or cryptographic hash.
Michael Shannon: And again, the a stands for availability now.
Michael Shannon: The aspect that we will for sure, be responsible for when it comes to availability is protecting server systems and distributed systems from denial of service.
Michael Shannon: denial of service de dos attacks those types of common attacks that have been around for decades to disrupt the clients ability to get you know, access to something but availability also is a resiliency issue.
Michael Shannon: Maybe part of business continuity and like I said as a security practitioner, we may not have our hands on this aspect.
Michael Shannon: Right, it may be the network infrastructure people with their active standby fail overs in their clusters of infrastructure devices.
Michael Shannon: You know database availability, maybe the database admins, you have the server admins so as security managers, yes, we want to make sure that we have availability and high availability, for example, leveraging.
Michael Shannon: A cloud provider that has availability zones in those regions all over the world, and those availability zones are miles and miles apart.
Michael Shannon: Their high availability solution is not like you know 911 where there was three buildings that collapsed and their high availability was in one of those other buildings, there was you know meters away or yards away.
Michael Shannon: We don't do that kind of high availability day.
Michael Shannon: Right, we want it, we want to make sure that we can that our availability can survive some localized event.
Michael Shannon: So we take advantage of different technologies that can stretch a database fabric multiple miles into availability zones, but that's the CIA triad right.
Michael Shannon: High Level availability right.
Michael Shannon: You have multiple data centers in a availability zone of the cloud provider, but those zones are 10s or more miles apart.
Michael Shannon: Using virtual extended local area networking which theoretically can be stretched up to 800 kilometers 600 miles around that now that's.
Michael Shannon: that's the theoretical limit but.
Michael Shannon: A lot of organizations their high availability solution that most cost effective way to do this now is to use aws Google cloud IBM cloud azure or some other in your country.
Michael Shannon: You can also look at CIA from the inverse you know the flip side right disclosure is the opposite of competence reality right the unauthorized revealing or unintentional revealing disclosure a alteration the opposite of integrity D destruction.
Michael Shannon: destruction or unauthorized destruction or disposition is obviously an attack on availability.
Michael Shannon: So don Parker.
Michael Shannon: He was a senior information systems manager, for a large corporation, so what he did, is he extended the CIA triad to the park carrion heck sad okay well what's the takeaway here really well, the one thing you did.
Michael Shannon: That was necessary and obvious was he added authenticity right, so he separated what used to be kind of you know, together.
Michael Shannon: Because of using things like ah Max he separated integrity from authenticity that was important, but he also added a couple of other things one utility you know the.
Michael Shannon: User usefulness of the asset, because it loses its utility or its value goes down that will affect the types of controls you use Okay, as its value goes down as its utility goes away.
Michael Shannon: That affects the type how you implement controls, he also adds possession in there, so, for example, you can lose possession.
Michael Shannon: But still not lose this goal, so, for example, if you have a.
Michael Shannon: let's say a a cold storage wallet right with your cyber currency keys on it.
Michael Shannon: If somebody is able to steal that but they can't steal the the password aspect to it and then you're 24 words seed phrase, or they can steal a safe or something.
Michael Shannon: Maybe it's a full disk encrypted firewire drive they may have possession, but not necessarily you're going to lose confidentiality.
Michael Shannon: Right, so he done Parker added a you know these six elements to it yeah utility i'll give you an example, so, for example, let's say that these slides okay so right now i'm using zoom and I am pushing out.
Michael Shannon: You know PowerPoint slides.
Michael Shannon: You can't get access to those you can get a PDF i'm giving you a PDF copy, but you don't get the actual PowerPoint slides.
Michael Shannon: Now we those are protected, those are in you know stored and those are encrypted, however, when the next course comes out the next iteration of CIS SP I or someone else will have to come in and we'll have to reproduce this course.
Michael Shannon: will suddenly the utility of the previous slide deck the value and the need to protect it has gone way down because we're no longer using those slides, we now have a new slide deck for a new course.
Michael Shannon: So we could move those to be good either dispose of them are moving to some archival storage, that is cheaper and not as secure.
Michael Shannon: that's probably not a great example but.
Michael Shannon: Think of usefulness, so they added those three okay.
Michael Shannon: utility well and assets such as data would be confidential controlled in integral integral authentic and available it's not always useful or valuable in its present form.
Michael Shannon: High Level authenticity, this would be will be with call possibly a step up authentication right so higher level authenticity, we think about that you may initially log on to a site.
Michael Shannon: Maybe you're going to use some type of you know, single sign on fog or whatever it may be some other type of multi factor authentication.
Michael Shannon: But once you get on to that site let's say an online brokerage firm or where your 401k is or you know your whatever.
Michael Shannon: Cyber currency exchange once you do the initial log on of authenticity, if you want to do some other type of transaction like make a withdrawal or make a substantial purchase or whatever they may be additional layers of authenticity.
Michael Shannon: Okay additional validation possibly something like a knowledge based authentication right where you'll go through that you have to answer like five questions with information that's in your public record Okay, you know what color was your.
Michael Shannon: kiya optima right what county Have you ever lived in or province, have you ever lived in right questions that are part of your public.
Michael Shannon: record, but really only you should know the color of the car you owned right or people or companies you've been associated with and in those five questions they'll there'll be at least one distractors where the answer should be none.
Michael Shannon: So if someone's trying to spoof you they're not going to know that.
Michael Shannon: they're going to make a wrong guess so higher level authenticity, which you know we would think of you know, using more stringent biometrics, for example.
Michael Shannon: ocular biometrics palm scans things like that So these are all you know security principles that you're expected to be aware of, but not just the basics right you're an experienced security manager for years or more.
Michael Shannon: Non repudiation is often added to the CIA triad yeah you actually often see the CIA n right the ability to refuse or deny that you participated in a transaction.
Michael Shannon: A digital transaction a digital contract or some type of email communication okay often non repudiation is going to use a.
Michael Shannon: You know, a symmetric key crypto system is going to involve digital signatures when we use digital signatures and one of the most common things that we digitally sign our certificates X 509 v3 certificates remember that's not confidentiality non repudiation you know it offers integrity.
Michael Shannon: or digital signatures offer integrity, they offer.
Michael Shannon: Origin authentication non repudiation as security services, but not confidentiality okay.
Michael Shannon: So, believe it or not, this is one of the objectives okay every slide that I have over these five days are from the objectives of the CIS SP exam.
Michael Shannon: So this is one of the things they expect you to know the osi model Okay, from the bottom up, and the top down.
Michael Shannon: Do we do we still use this model, not so much okay usually most of the things that we produce are using the Microsoft four layer model.
Michael Shannon: that combines layer five through seven into an application layer and it combines layer one and two together, but you know, on the exam you'll need to be familiar.
Michael Shannon: With these layers and what happens at these layers i'm not going to go through and teach this right, but you have them these slides in your.
Michael Shannon: pdfs to use as a reference, if you have to fill in the gaps.
Michael Shannon: But like I said, you know most often today it's this four layer model that we're using.
Michael Shannon: Were the things that were done by the application presentation and session layer are now just the application layer technically speaking ssl pls is a layer five service.
Michael Shannon: Okay, whereas obviously IP SEC which isn't on here would be a layer three and layer four.
Michael Shannon: So you know, obviously, when you see a protocol, you know, like http with a forward slash s right http forward slash s or you see ftp s you know.
Michael Shannon: What we're talking about is that this layer seven Protocol forward slash over this layer five Protocol The irony is even though we still call it https ftp ftp s we really shouldn't be using ssl anymore.
Michael Shannon: Definitely not over the public Internet okay so it's all about transport layer security.
Michael Shannon: But there is a four layer model and today if you're doing anything that's you know.
Michael Shannon: Internet related or web enabled usually the developer of the Web application or the service is combining everything that happens from layer five through seven.
Michael Shannon: Okay, in fact, maybe even, in some areas like even layer for.
Michael Shannon: More and more on the Internet we're going to be seeing this protocol from Google being used quick.
Michael Shannon: Quick basically does away with tcp.
Michael Shannon: And it uses UDP and it combines basically UDP plus pls plus http next generation, so you know, from a practical standpoint on the Internet we're not there yet, but eventually we'll probably see tcp be like eliminated.
Michael Shannon: Generally speaking, replaced with other mechanisms that are going to involve a UDP and then more of the till UDP will be the main transport mechanism and everything else is kind of built in a layer five to seven quick being an example of that, but even the three way handshake.
Michael Shannon: If you have a zero trust initiative, where you're using software to find perimeters, for example, it's very possible that using single packet authentication SEPA so you're not even using the tcp handshake so that's kind of you know where we're going.
Michael Shannon: So I got those slides in there alright.
Michael Shannon: So some more principles right we're just kind of making sure we have everything you know, are not just the fundamentals covered.
Michael Shannon: But we have to also understand from a experience security manager standpoint higher levels so when I say higher levels of least privilege.
Michael Shannon: You should start thinking well we're implementing a zero trust initiative we're getting we're you know we're.
Michael Shannon: Getting very granular we were using you know attribute based access, controls, where you are authorized to an authorization profile through some centralized system or proxy or engine based on what you're using Where are you how are you accessing it.
Michael Shannon: So least privilege, is more than just the simple concept of you should only be able to take actions based on what you're authenticated authorized to do.
Michael Shannon: Right from a experienced security manager standpoint, you know, we need to think about well, what is the context.
Michael Shannon: In you know, in the in what is our identity management, how are we delivering least privilege.
Michael Shannon: Or we just simply doing it through our discretionary access, controls in you know, using active directory is that simply what it is, are we going beyond that.
Michael Shannon: we'll talk about those things.
Michael Shannon: So you know, according to nist.
Michael Shannon: least privilege and 853 their special publication.
Michael Shannon: They would say it's authorizing access to all security functions for sure.
Michael Shannon: Use non privileged accounts or roles and this kind of goes back to some you know another principle that we've used for you know decades.
Michael Shannon: Where you're highly privileged users, also have a non privilege type of account or access so like in windows an active directory, you know you may be a domain administrator or a local administrator, but you have a normal user account.
Michael Shannon: that's just a global user and that's the account you use, but when you need to do some type of privilege activity, you will run as administrator and provide some new credential or in Linux you know pseudo into a new context.
Michael Shannon: That has been around you know for a while.
Michael Shannon: A non privileged users, they shouldn't be able to execute any privilege functions under the context of their user account, and you know doing heavy auditing massive auditing and visibility.
Michael Shannon: ISO IEC 27,001 you know least privileged access to all networks and network services manager managed privileged access rights.
Michael Shannon: programs that are you know running vulnerability tools vulnerability assessment tools.
Michael Shannon: Access to source code, you know least privileged access to your code repository, whether it be in your data Center or github or a cloud provider.
Michael Shannon: And Dave is exactly right there's no trick questions.
Michael Shannon: Now, you may not agree.
Michael Shannon: Okay, because you're being you're being you're being examined.
Michael Shannon: you're being questioned, a lot of times by by CIS SP question authors, that are not not even more necessarily more experienced than you are they mentioned that they may have nowhere near the real world experience you have.
Michael Shannon: So you have to try to choose sometimes that's the best answer.
Michael Shannon: From the CIS SP point of view, which is always security management.
Michael Shannon: And there may be a couple of questions that you get wrong because you just don't agree with their point of view.
Michael Shannon: unlikely, but still not no trick questions.
Michael Shannon: they're just trying to they're trying to validate.
Michael Shannon: That you have that experience that you claim to have when you go through the process of you know.
Michael Shannon: which you do you know you have to go through a process, you know to be validated, to provide your work experience right, so you have to you know basically.
Michael Shannon: go through and kind of kind of a written interview, but you provide information.
Michael Shannon: they're trying to validate that Okay, on behalf of the global security community.
Michael Shannon: Defense in depth, also referred to as layered Defense okay now Defense in depth and layered Defense does tie into a more traditional you know secure the perimeter approach.
Michael Shannon: But remember on this exam you're still going to be expected to manage the security of an organization that has more traditionally you know.
Michael Shannon: we're securing the perimeter we're securing the edge.
Michael Shannon: What zero trust proponents would call you know the crunchy outside with the gooey Center.
Michael Shannon: like an m&m or a skittle right hard outside but kind of chewy inside a chewy Center.
Michael Shannon: that's something that zero trust people.
Michael Shannon: would say we've got to fix that we have to change that.
Michael Shannon: So the question you have to understand is this question under the context of does this environment are they deploying that more traditional type of securing the edge with Defense in depth mechanisms as their primary methodology like a small to medium sized business.
Michael Shannon: they're going to focus on, you know their highly available, you know Cisco as a firewalls and intrusion prevention systems and secure.
Michael Shannon: Secure switches and routers and a traditional data Center with a V lance.
Michael Shannon: Or are you.
Michael Shannon: Securing a data Center with VX land and highly virtual with hypervisor clusters and.
Michael Shannon: You know storage area networking, it depends on the context of the question.
Michael Shannon: So Defense in depth or layered Defense can be physical because you can even think of you know, a physical of a campus having physical Defense in depth wherever your property line is with your finances, of whatever type and height.
Michael Shannon: Electric not electric barbed wire no barbed wire gates security guards, all the way back to the keep whatever, that is, can be a safe a walk in safe, it could be the network operations Center the data Center whatever Defense in depth can be physical.
Michael Shannon: It can also be technical right you've got an edge router that's doing network address translation some security services like an infrastructure apple but behind that you have a firewall firewall system, maybe you have a honey net.
Michael Shannon: You set up you've got security on you have maybe an inline ips sensor maybe it's part of the firewall so the Defense in depth can be technical the Trolls and it can be completely logical if you have an all in one firewall appliance from Palo Alto or somewhere like that.
Michael Shannon: The Defense in depth, is being done as your engines in that all in one appliance act on the data grams of the packets that are flowing through that layer three device.
Michael Shannon: And they're probably not a hop they could be, you know that layer three device could be participating in a dynamic routing protocol, and it could you know deprecate the.
Michael Shannon: Time delivery field and the IP header or it can be more transparent, but regardless it's just a single appliance and there's Defense in depth.
Michael Shannon: Do you have the infrastructure actual the firewall rules, maybe you have an ips sensor it's integrated or it's a modular components, maybe you're communicating with some email security appliance or web security appliance or the cloud.
Michael Shannon: But you've got Defense in depth, but it's all done logically as that packet reverses that one device.
Michael Shannon: we're starting to see Defense in depth.
Michael Shannon: Analysis really come into play, over the last couple of years because of the risks we've seen at the supply chain, or the disruptions massive disruptions to the supply chain.
Michael Shannon: So layered security again.
Michael Shannon: Lots of ways to approach it.
Michael Shannon: Again, the really the trend is to not just depend on our perimeter security edge security.
Michael Shannon: And that's a transition some companies take longer to transition than others Cisco you know, which is what my experiences in since the 90s, I was, I was a Cisco instructor CC NP for several different things.
Michael Shannon: You know, sometimes because of their the nature of their acquisitions of hardware and companies there and as they aren't as agile or nimble as other companies.
Michael Shannon: Okay, so sometimes they kind of cling to their interface based firewalls too long before they go zone based or they cling to you know edge security before they kind of you know, get on board with a zero trust initiative.
Michael Shannon: So here's kind of a more traditional.
Michael Shannon: perimeter security is this is, these are technical controls okay So these are going to be in your slide deck a couple of times.
Michael Shannon: DHS Einstein, by the way, that is a that's a this this diagram comes from the Department of Homeland Security in the US and i'm not even sure that Einstein programs going on, but this is a really good example of kind of traditional.
Michael Shannon: controls.
Michael Shannon: So I put you want to be familiar make sure that you're familiar with all these different terms.
Michael Shannon: As part of your gap analysis okay.
Michael Shannon: uh.
Michael Shannon: You, for example, US gcb compliance that's the United States Government configuration baseline.
Michael Shannon: used to be called something else and security baselines whether they're do D or Center for security CIS, those are important.
Michael Shannon: Application security which we're going to talk about 10% of the exam.
Michael Shannon: data security.
Michael Shannon: dlp we know that's data loss prevention or data leakage prevention da R is data at rest.
Michael Shannon: And then you've got.
Michael Shannon: management policy manager will cover these areas and monitoring your response.
Michael Shannon: Which is going to include you know seem systems source systems, often working together.
Michael Shannon: If you want to see an example of semen source systems, working together, you know go check out something like as your Sentinel which is cloud based.
Michael Shannon: So I put those in there for you.
Michael Shannon: Another principle and, by the way we take two breaks okay to 15 minute breaks every session so our first break will be 15 minutes after the next hour so we've got 25 more minutes okay.
Michael Shannon: If you need to take a break before then remember this is being recorded but also we're kind of you know, covering some foundational topics, but our first break will be 15 minutes after the hour.
Michael Shannon: separation or segregation of duties Okay, this is a very important aspect that's that takes least privilege to another level, it takes the integrity to another level okay.
Michael Shannon: Separation of duties, could be a dual operator scenario where you have to have at least two people per service or system or function Okay, but it could also be a very strict partitioning of your responsibilities and your roles, for example, if you work at a cloud provider data Center.
Michael Shannon: it's very rare there's there's only a small group of people that have access to every area of the data Center Okay, you may be isolated to the security operations Center.
Michael Shannon: If you have a separate knock and a separate suck network operations, you may be, I may be isolated there okay so.
Michael Shannon: Other things that tie into segregation or separation of duties and it will be give you the kind of classic example where the people that do the database backups and create the snapshots a different group does the restoration right that's kind of a classic separation of duties.
Michael Shannon: model it talk about maybe two signatures, maybe multiple cryptographic keys for certain activities.
Michael Shannon: Also rotation of duties can be another principle that's it's put in there, where you rotate out of a particular role or responsibility on a regular basis.
Michael Shannon: And that is for a couple of reasons, one to this note, you don't have a single point of failure as from a personnel standpoint but you don't really want to have.
Michael Shannon: Right continuity of operations or business continuity planning, you want to try to as part of bcp if you have too many individuals who are the only people that know how this works.
Michael Shannon: or know how to run this system or application that's not a good thing for continuity of operations for sure, but rotation of duties is also done so that especially to hire privileged.
Michael Shannon: Employees and specialist so once you rotate them out you're going to audit them and it's also if they know they can be rotated out and they don't know when maybe there's their least likely to engage in unauthorized or illegal activities right.
Michael Shannon: Or you know mandatory vacations right if you have a you take a two week vacation you have to take that two week vacation you do not come back into the Office for two weeks now, some of us.
Michael Shannon: haven't been into the Office for years right I haven't i've been working remotely from this company I haven't seen my co workers in I guess it'll be almost three years.
Michael Shannon: We haven't been able to have you know, a summit, or you know, one of those times, where we all get together in Boston.
Michael Shannon: it's been a long time.
Michael Shannon: Keep it simple okay.
Michael Shannon: You make things too complex.
Michael Shannon: Then you may have the you know opposite result.
Michael Shannon: Okay, you need to find a delicate balance because remember you are obligated to understand how your business functions.
Michael Shannon: You have to contribute.
Michael Shannon: by securing, whatever your value proposition is.
Michael Shannon: Whatever your product or service you're participating in securing the process of developing that or manufacturing that or whatever.
Michael Shannon: So there's a delicate balance between creating a secure environment and.
Michael Shannon: affecting productivity or output or negatively affecting the delivery of the value proposition.
Michael Shannon: Okay.
Michael Shannon: And examples this you know your password policy and hopefully you're going to be getting away from passwords eventually all together right when we will be using biometrics.
Michael Shannon: tokens qr codes.
Michael Shannon: Hopefully, with some type of centralized database or centralized engine, we can call it an access control proxy like Google uses with an inventory engine for their you know attribute based access control plus their you know.
Michael Shannon: Their their zero trust initiative which is called beyond corp.
Michael Shannon: You know they they're moving beyond passwords.
Michael Shannon: And so you know, three words that are unrelated separated by dots or dashes that's actually more.
Michael Shannon: Strong it's stronger than the one below it this looks like it would be stronger.
Michael Shannon: But technically it's not and also the things that we add to our.
Michael Shannon: passwords the substitutions that we make you know the at symbol for an A the five for an s.
Michael Shannon: The exclamation point for something those aren't as those aren't as clever as we think they are those are already in downloadable databases corporate.
Michael Shannon: systems that have been hacked and those passwords that use a lot of substitutions those are already in loanable files that we can use with you know are cracking tools.
Michael Shannon: i've already mentioned zero trust a couple of times.
Michael Shannon: A an evolving paradigm.
Michael Shannon: Moving away from edge and perimeter security.
Michael Shannon: To tackle the chewy Center.
Michael Shannon: The chewy Center is those compromised privileged insiders are number one threat.
Michael Shannon: The number one threat to your organization is the compromised privileged insider some people call them disgruntled I don't like to use that term because you can you can love your company, you can love your boss, you can love the department you work in.
Michael Shannon: Love my job.
Michael Shannon: You cannot be disgruntled, but you can be compromised financially compromised gambling problem drug problem someone's trying to extort you the list goes on your disgruntled but you might be desperate.
Michael Shannon: And compromised, so those that's your chewy Center the zero trust is involved in no trust trust no entity trust, no one.
Michael Shannon: And all of the different variations of their access must be monitored must have total visibility, as well as the objects, are the assets that they can access and the changes to those assets.
Michael Shannon: No implicit trust just because you're behind the firewall and this definitely as For those of you who have deployed firewalls i'm sure many of you have.
Michael Shannon: Just look at the the the nomenclature or look at the verbiage, we use to describe our zones here's the trusted zone here's the untrusted zone here's the dmz.
Michael Shannon: Was zero trust there is no trusted zone.
Michael Shannon: authentication authorization distinct tasks before the session is established and, by the way, in fact, that security session, you should be moving away from vpn technology.
Michael Shannon: Google and if you ever go half the time you can go look at their beyond corp they're the ones that really you know.
Michael Shannon: really lead the way.
Michael Shannon: Yes, it's been around for several years, but they started to implement this and, like I think 2015 and it was like a you know they knew is gonna take a long time.
Michael Shannon: So beyond corp is there was their initiative.
Michael Shannon: Rarely, does it does a Google employee use a vpn it's only if you know absolutely necessary because of where they're located and their job duty.
Michael Shannon: Micro segmentation is more from approaching a zero trust initiative from an application and a software security standpoint.
Michael Shannon: But.
Michael Shannon: For example, Google they don't use vpn they don't have vpn clients installed or agents like you know Dave and I, we have a corporate laptop, but we have the Cisco any connect mobility client.
Michael Shannon: If you work for Google, you have a provisioned device and you're using chrome with a special add on which is part of your software defined perimeter and that add on is communicating with the controller.
Michael Shannon: In the cloud.
Michael Shannon: So this is a very important initiative.
Michael Shannon: And it is you know to be defined on the exam.
Michael Shannon: This I put some diagrams in here, you know, to help you, you know with zero trust its identity management, and it goes beyond just what is my source IP address.
Michael Shannon: Okay, you are authenticating and authorizing every session, and so in a zero trust architecture, let me give you an example.
Michael Shannon: If you were using a cloud provider like aws or Google cloud, yes, you could go up to that cloud provider and you could use their iam service, where you would create groups.
Michael Shannon: And you would create users and those users forget certain permissions and they're usually json documents that say, these are the persistent permissions I have to cloud resources, you can do that.
Michael Shannon: But those persistent types of permissions and access to the cloud or access keys that I use programmatically those types of methodologies are not zero trust.
Michael Shannon: Those are persistent keys I have those are persistent permissions that I have that have compromised, whoever compromises those now they have those persistent zero trust is more session based so you're using assertions and tokens.
Michael Shannon: Your access is not persistent it's session based.
Michael Shannon: preferably in a federated environment saml two point o o IDC and oh off those types of scenarios and the big the big user at the bottom automating as much as possible and visibility and continual analytics.
Michael Shannon: And also part of zero trust is when you look at the fact that you have subjects and objects, not only do you understand the attributes of the subject, and they can change.
Michael Shannon: So it's highly built on attribute based access, controls, what are they using where are they, why are they doing this, what is what are they accessing what time are they accessing it.
Michael Shannon: From where those attributes, but also the the objects that they're accessing that posture can change constantly.
Michael Shannon: and needs to be updated upgraded, it is a service pack, it needs a hot fix these just security update so an inventory system that is integrated with your access control system, because the subject can be in a different scenario different variables, but the objects change.
Michael Shannon: And, especially if the object is like code and you're using agile or ci CD the Code, the object that could be changing several times a day.
Michael Shannon: So zero trust involves.
Michael Shannon: Massive visibility into those that relationship and that the relationship between the the subject The object is session based preferably not a persistent type of access and preferably not using traditional vpn technology which is.
Michael Shannon: highly suspect.
Michael Shannon: Then there's we'll talk more about this when we get to application security secure by design secure by deployment secure by default well right now the takeaway here is secure by deployment is the is the least optimal.
Michael Shannon: it's the least optimal saying that I am not securing this APP or application or whatever by design or by default, but i'm i'm deploying it into a secure environment that's the least optimal and, by the way, that is what many organizations have relied upon.
Michael Shannon: i've got a you know i've got a I got a firewall so I have a secure environment.
Michael Shannon: i've got you know private V lance.
Michael Shannon: So secure defaults the existing default configuration settings are the most secure possible you know another aspect of zero trust.
Michael Shannon: Is the fact that the days of me connecting to infrastructure devices, whether you whether i'm using an out of band method on a serial port.
Michael Shannon: Or whether i'm using some centralized access with a management V land and i'm directly connecting to devices secure Shell and doing configuration from some console or management station those days are going away and we'll talk about.
Michael Shannon: You know, a big part of of zero trust is using is using a.
Michael Shannon: relatively new software defined networking, which means I am securely with multifactor authentication logging onto a controller, and the controller, is sending API.
Michael Shannon: Calls or request to the to the devices to the infrastructure i'm not connecting to those devices to do management access or administer them anymore.
Michael Shannon: I security log on to a cluster of controllers and from there, I use infrastructure as code.
Michael Shannon: Secure configurations secure API calls to the to the devices in the infrastructure.
Michael Shannon: Okay.
Michael Shannon: So an example, you might want to look up is microsoft's as your security default just an example, this exam, even though I do mention things like azure or Cisco or aws or Google the exam is vendor neutral.
Michael Shannon: it's vendor neutral.
Michael Shannon: Okay.
Michael Shannon: Failing securely implementing a mode of system termination or functions that prevents any loss of your secure state when there's a crash or a failure or some type of reboot.
Michael Shannon: Okay attackers and this also ties into zero trust often another aspect of zero trust is moving security from the application, down to the system, the the the board.
Michael Shannon: Right trusted platform modules.
Michael Shannon: Even you're starting to see what's called micro hsm.
Michael Shannon: On little memory cards hardware security modules running off of little memory cards, but attackers should not be able to get any type of access, during a failure state of a server or a system.
Michael Shannon: Failing securely.
Michael Shannon: When you.
Michael Shannon: deploy failure undo changes or rollbacks to a secure state.
Michael Shannon: You must maintain availability confidentiality and integrity at all states of the system.
Michael Shannon: and moving security keys and passwords and and certificates down to the hardware level can be very beneficial.
Michael Shannon: This is really a misnamed slide.
Michael Shannon: Okay, with fail, open and fail close, let me just remove that.
Michael Shannon: I meant to do that in my last class let's just talk about this concept.
Michael Shannon: fail, open and fail closed.
Michael Shannon: This is more traditionally something that you would implement.
Michael Shannon: And there is an element of this on a firewall, but it really has to do with.
Michael Shannon: Different monitoring services like CES log sending CES log traps, I want to talk about this from the standpoint of an inline ips okay intrusion prevention systems so traditionally whether the ips is a standalone sensor.
Michael Shannon: That is behind a firewall which it could be, it could be running in an operating system, it could be running as a modular components chassis whatever logically the ips the in line ips system is logically behind the firewall.
Michael Shannon: But the firewall has to act on the packets, and my IP a sensor, which is in line should only be acting on data grams that have.
Michael Shannon: gone through the firewall process.
Michael Shannon: The only I wouldn't really ever imagine deploying an ips sensor in front of a firewall now maybe an ids a detection service.
Michael Shannon: To kind of see how you're being attacked, or maybe on a honey net without an inline sensor so you can deploy and in line ips sensor and fail open or fail closed right simply if some component or some part of the the ips sensor fails.
Michael Shannon: I still want traffic to flow okay I don't consider the ips has zero Lee a mission Critical Infrastructure device I have other methods, I have other visibility tools i'll react so if if the device fails keep the traffic flowing fail closed is.
Michael Shannon: If the for some reason, something fails on the sensor do not allow traffic to flow through the inline device.
Michael Shannon: And there's some firewalls and other devices, they can also be configured in such a way, for example, if I no longer sending you know SIS logs or SNP traps or informs I want to not allow traffic to flow, but I think the the ips sensors a better example of this.
Michael Shannon: Alright, so privacy of.
Michael Shannon: We don't my privacy privacy.
Michael Shannon: really is from a management standpoint, a subset of confidentiality, but not synonymous, because privacy really is focused usually on data sensitive data.
Michael Shannon: You know, intellectual property personal information health information corporate secrets things like that, where confidentiality is a much larger you know umbrella term.
Michael Shannon: So.
Michael Shannon: Is C squared the organization that does this, as we talked about in the very beginning, they are very nifty okay misty means they you know they get a lot of their content from the National Institute of standards of technology.
Michael Shannon: And their frameworks okay.
Michael Shannon: Privacy by design you take privacy into account when you design applications or systems or you develop services.
Michael Shannon: realizing that data may be in other geographic areas.
Michael Shannon: So gee you know how subject are you to gdpr.
Michael Shannon: Now the gdpr topic, if it comes up is tricky Okay, you have to think of the gdpr and it involves not just EU and things that are under the EU umbrella.
Michael Shannon: Because the EU is also like the United States, because we have like protectorates right they're not states, but you know we have Puerto Rico and guam they're not states but they're kind of so EU as like protectorates as well, but it's also if you do business with the EU.
Michael Shannon: Well, this is one of those areas that you have to think about well when this when this exam was written.
Michael Shannon: So that so I doubt there's gonna be specific questions about gdpr.
Michael Shannon: Because it's gone through different you know, based on what the EU judges, say, because I think I think March, I think, just a few weeks ago, in March, the US just kind of.
Michael Shannon: Had a new agreement trans borders some agreement.
Michael Shannon: Okay.
Michael Shannon: i'm pretty sure, like the 25th so that this is a kind of an organic thing don't get too hung up on, you know.
Michael Shannon: The the you know granular aspects of gdpr things like that.
Michael Shannon: Coming communication to all of your employees, so they understand you know their role, but not just communication, but acceptable use policies that are enforced Those are all important principles.
Michael Shannon: This concept of trust, but verify this is going away, this is what we used for years, when we made sure that the corporate edge was secure.
Michael Shannon: We had a secure edge as much as possible and within the organization within our local area networks and our extra nets and partner nets and vpn trust, but verify.
Michael Shannon: And that could involve you know simple SMS messages or whatever, but this trust, but verify concept, we are in an evolution of getting away from this.
Michael Shannon: Is trust, but verify is not zero trust it's what we've done traditionally.
Michael Shannon: Trust but verify.
Michael Shannon: But still a valid approach that many organizations are using okay so we'll take our first break we come back we're going to kind of change topics here we're going to look at.
Michael Shannon: security, governance and this is, you know this first day is really kind of a big picture day right security, governance we're going to cover we're going to look at some policy.
Michael Shannon: we're going to cover today, so you know it kind of it's kind of a big picture day as opposed to getting too specific building that.
Michael Shannon: You know foundation.
Michael Shannon: So let's take a break i'm going to stop the recording because you don't want a 15 minute break on your recording so i'm going to stop the recording.